So you talked a little bit about Black Power, but
what impact do you think that they had then, like
Stokely Carmichael and the Panthers? I think they
had a, you needed all of those things at the time.
You needed all of those things. I'm not, even
though it was a, I was philosophically opposed to
the so-called Black Power. You know, one of the
things that, you know, your parents teach you,
they teach Your parents really teach you right.
They teach you right. And what my parents told me,
always said, look, you're no better than nobody
else. And you're no worse than nobody else. You're
the same. You're a man, just like anybody else. You
put on your pants like them, the same way you bleed
red blood. Your brain, your body.
Physiologically, it's the same. You just got a
different skin hue in your hair. Maybe a little
different. But basically, you can take one part
and put it in another person. And I think
philosophically, the black power thing alluded
to somehow you wanted to dominate and be the person
on top. But that's not what you really wanted. You
just wanted equal opportunity. Right. Not to
dominate anybody else, because if you did, you
were no better than the person that you, you know,
you could just replace one with another. Mm-hmm.
And, uh, but it did scare people of what would
happen, because there were a lot of places in the
South where blacks were the majority. Mm-hmm. A
lot of counties, my county, Pike County, Alabama,
blacks were in the majority. My hometown, blacks
were in the majority of the population. And this
kind of a thing scared those people. And it helped
galvanize support. Sometimes that, you
know, you wouldn't have gotten. And it also turned
people against you. That was a place for
everybody. I mean, looking back at it, that was a
place for everybody. But at the time, trying to
adhere to what Dr. King's philosophy was and what
have you, this was totally out of kilter with what
those, I guess you might call them, disciples,
people who would listen to him, and this
nonviolent movement and what have you. a totally
different way. Totally opposite, right? Yeah,
totally opposite of what he was trying to say or do.
So, uh, to me and a lot of the people, uh, it was then,
look, if I graduate from college, I want, you know,
the same opportunity at a job. I want the same pay. I
just stopped by. All right. I'll holler at you.
Okay. All right. Uh, uh, I want the same
opportunity. I don't want any more. You know, sort
of like today they talk about quotas and things.
Well, whites interpret this as saying blacks,
because you're black, you want a white man's job.
That should be an equal number. But nobody, and I
guess I'm one of the old timers, I guess, now. I
don't want, I'm opposed to quotas. But how else can
you get an equal number of blacks into a position?
Because people are people. I have a business here.
Who am I going to hire? Blacks.
You're going to hire people that you know, your
friends and what have you. And because our society
is, and until Like, I hope my daughters don't have
to do this. I have to send my daughters to Allen
Academy and Montessori School. And like this
weekend, a lot of her friends or personal friends
or wife went out to a slumber party and this kind of a
thing. These kids will have this personal
relationship. I never had that type of, except,
you know, the fella down the street from me. And it
was a tenuous type thing at best. that we had, you
know, sometimes. Was that your friend in Alabama?
Yeah. Yeah, it was a tenuous type thing at best, you
know. Although we felt close to each other, he felt
the pressure from the white community. I felt the
pressure from the black community. And, you know,
at the time we didn't really understand it, but We
knew it was something else there, you know, what
was going on. So, you know, that black power thing,
the philosophy of the black power thing was not
what the old, how do you say it? I don't want to say
the old, and I sound like I'm ancient and antique.
But the people who were like in the original, in the
early beginnings of it, who were taught the
nonviolent techniques and procedures and things
like this, it just didn't sit real well with you. So
you think it was more the younger men, even more the
ones that were younger? No, I think people like
Carmichael and what have you, they thought that by
demanding these kind of things and threatening
people and what have you, that they could get more.
And they did help. But in the end, if you carried it
out to the end, it was self-defeating. If you
carried what they were saying out to the end, it was
self-defeating. What the nonviolent movement
strove to do was to make people so ashamed of
themselves that they would do what was right. In
other words, you changed that person's heart, not
did it Because he had to, or was forced to. You know,
people who were claiming them. Make the other
people, make the white, or the people that have
been repressing, feel like, realize what they've
been doing. What they've been doing, yeah. It was
wrong.
And then when it comes from that person, you have a
better chance than somebody that's standing up
and wasn't going to make it. Right. Sort of like
church, you know, parents make you go to church.
But until you have been converted, it doesn't
really mean much.
So just I guess this is one more thing I just wanted
to ask you about the Black Panthers. I never knew
much about the Black Panthers. Really? No. That
was like on the West. They weren't very popular in
the South. No, they weren't. people admired them.
And you know, they were ultra-vile. But I never, I
met a few of them, but they were just, how do you say,
they were just too far for me. And I say I, when I say
me, I'm talking about, and maybe I shouldn't, I
should only speak for myself, but speaking with a
lot of my old friends, like Bill Frazier, John
Lewis, and people like this, when we talk, we don't
want to do that. You can't win in the end. You just
can't. The white man controls the military, and
how are you going to win a war? You can't do it.
So we just talked a little bit about some of the
programs they did in a lot of the ghettos and some of
their social programs as well as we talked a lot
about there. Did y'all hear more about the
violence or did y'all hear more about the? We heard
about the social program. But here and again, how
were these things financed? Some people got
scared. and gave them some money because they
didn't want these niggas to blow this place away.
Is that how they got a lot of it? A lot of it. I mean,
that's oversimplifying. Right. But
what you wanted, you wanted nobody to take care of
you. You wanted the ability to do for yourself. And
a lot of that, by doing that, that in and of itself
still made you a slave that's again that's always
because you were still depending on what somebody
else it did not give you the the ability to you know
do it for yourself or be yourself and even though
you had this big gun you were still no better than
the sharecropper who was depending on this man for
his land and wanted to buy seed and all this kind of
thing. And this is not that I'm out of it and that
it's removed from it. These are some of the things
that a lot of the young kids, youngsters like
myself, a lot of the things we discussed when
options and people came around trying to get you to
start these chapters and look at this, what we
really want to do. And what would have come in the
end? A lot more violence, I guess, obviously.
Yeah, and what you can't win.
Well, I just wanted to ask you, and I guess some
wrap-up questions are, I just wanted to ask you
about, well, what impacted the deaths of both
Malcolm, I mean, since they were both different,
totally opposite extremes, almost, in a lot of
ways, Malcolm and Martin had on the... especially
Martin, had on the civil rights movement, you
think, when his death came?
Malcolm's legacy, I think,
came after his death. He had a few followers.
Statistically, there are very few American
blacks who follow Islam. the Muslim movement,
which he espoused. And even Malcolm himself
divorced himself from that particular
philosophy, the separatists and all this kind of a
crowd. So I think that the words Malcolm, like the
book Malcolm X, if you ever read that book, I think
what he said, even himself was converted in the
end. To his ideal or to Christian or to his ideal?
What do you mean his ideal? His overall
philosophy. See, the black Muslim preaches this
thing about separation, and superiority, and all
of this kind of stuff.
Malcolm, you know, in writing this book, it didn't
quite come out like that. It was a little bit
different. what the so-called
black Muslim movement was about. And most people
in the black community feel for that reason, why
the Muslim killer. Because he was one of their
better known spokespersons and what have you. And
for him to break with what they were saying, how do
you say it?
cast a black eye on what they were espousing.
Martin Luther King, on the other hand,
I think, not taking anything away from Martin
Luther King, but I think the time, I think
sometimes events make a man, rather than a man
making events. Even though King was well prepared
for it and everything like that, I think events and
people had a lot to do with making King. Of course,
he had the right things to say to take advantage of
these things and what have you. The loss of King was
a loss
because he affected more people. His way of trying
to bring about change affected more people. You
take like the women's rights movement came out of
the civil rights movement, lesbians and gays,
Hispanics. All of these things were like as a
result of Martin Luther King and the civil rights
movement. So I think King's death
temporarily put a halt to it. Even though some
people may disagree with me, I think that because
King was so far ahead of his time, he lost a lot of his
popularity because of issues that he took, like
the Vietnam War. But ultimately, he was right. But
at the time, when he was saying it, people would
say, hey, this man is unpatriotic. He's a
communist and all this kind of thing. But he was
right. A lot of things that he said that tarnished
him while he was living somewhat later proved to be
true. So I think he was a thinker who was having been
put in that role. He made the best of it. I guess in a
way, it's kind of like Churchill in England.
Having been put in that role, he had the
wherewithal to handle it. So it was definitely a
loss to the black community,
particularly symbolically of what the black
community really want. You had a lot of people
after him who went off in different directions.
which only helped to divide the movement, I think.
You didn't have a solidarity or one voice or one
philosophy that had been proven to win. And your
leader, I guess, it just seemed like. Well, I think
a lot of people look at that a lot differently than I
do. He was symbolic of leadership, but there were
other men in the South who were, they didn't have a
national following or scope or they were not as
eloquent as King. But I think a lot of people tend to
think in the black community they got this one
chief and a whole bunch of Indians. But it's just
like the white community. You got a lot of people
who think independently. They're not going to
follow anybody. They're going to do what they want
to do, you know. But I think for the time and for the
60s and whatever, King was the right man. And I
think that his legacy will live on because not only
was he
good for blacks, he was good for whites. He was good
for the country. He was a black man, but what he
espoused was good for the country. even though we
are still struggling with this thing. Just think,
if we didn't spend a lot of our money and time and
resources on this type of thing, how much better of
a country we would be if we could adequately
challenge the Japanese.
There's no limit to what we can do, but we spend a lot
of our energy still
superior and inferior type things. You know, you
look at the university out there, you hear all
kinds of things about this group going, this
rights, and all of this kind of a thing. Wasting
time and money. Dr. Mullen would be better
spending his time, you know, maybe doing
something in the veterinary medicine department
or whatever. Instead of spending his time with
Ray's relations, that shouldn't even be... So you
think he should just... I don't think I exactly
understand that. Well, what I'm saying is, when
you take a lot of your time and energy, take for
instance you and I, or let's say if I own a business,
and say, if I had to spend a lot of my resources and
time figuring out a way I find I'm going to keep some
white person out. That's time lost that I could
have been using in a positive manner to make more
money, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera,
et cetera. And I'm saying that we still waste a lot
of time and money with the problem that,
and yet we have more churches than any place in the
world. Christian churches anyway. And
we don't live up to what we say we are.
Well, yeah, I understand what you're talking
about. I mean, I understand where you're coming
from. You know, you go to any church on a Sunday
morning, it's still the most segregated hour in
the nation. It is, isn't it? And this is where
everybody's supposed to be equal and right and all
that. I tell people this. I don't only say this to
whites. I tell people in our church, hey, why don't
we go out and try to get some white converts or
Hispanic converts?
Even at the daycare, I found it. And I told them that
if we developed a daycare that was a very good
daycare, whites would come, and they have. In the
Bryant community? Yeah, out of the church. They
could come to the daycare. We had whites there.
Hispanics there. But we spent so much time trying
to... Prior to that time, we were trying to keep
that little thing. It was a good daycare. We were
trying to keep it... to ourselves, you know. But
here you are, every Sunday morning, you get up
talking about God, and you've been changed, and
all of this kind of a thing, which, you know,
attracts to it. And that, and that's the whole,
that's the whole underpinning of the, it seemed
like, to me, I mean, that's a lot of the
Christianity, or the beliefs and the values of
that were a lot of the whole, under the whole civil
rights movement. Right. I mean, the non-violence
and Take a page from Jesus. That's all.
Okay. That's really all the questions I had for you
and stuff. I really enjoyed talking with you. It
was an experience. It was a time. I'm very
fortunate. I feel very fortunate and happy that I
lived in those times. A pivotal point. so-called
in American
history. And I feel that I'm a better person as a
result of it. However, as an American, I can see
that we still have a long ways to go, a lot of things
to do. And I'm not going to ever waste my energy
hating anybody. I waste my energy in a detrimental
fashion. I still want equality and everything
like that. But hate and this kind of thing. I heard a
man say one time that if you're going to keep a pig in
the mud, you have to get in that mud. So if one person
wanted to hold somebody else down, he got to get
down to that person. You can't stay up there. The
slave owner, it brought him down a notch or two. He
had to do what he had to do to control his slaves. You
couldn't take the high road. And as I said, the
lessons that I learned from that period of time
I don't think any schooling or anything could have
taught me what I learned as a result of it. I'm sure
your children, do you just have one daughter? Oh, I
have five children. Do you? Yeah. But I'm sure that
they know a lot about, do you think that a lot, for
the most of the black community realizes, I mean a
lot of the younger generation now, They don't know
what happened. They don't know what is happening.
I think TV and the instant syndrome has really
gotten the best of America, black and white.
Because I watch TV, I let my kids watch it, but you
have to put it in its proper place. We've replaced
instant things with the ability to read and write
and do mathematics. We've replaced the thought
process with the computer, almost. You don't
really have to think you're programmed to write
things.
My kids, I try to teach them. I teach them that they
are black. But they just happen to be black, just
the way the cards were built. There's no
stigmatism to being that way. And just like
there's no stigmatism to that person being white.
And I teach them to respect everybody, regardless
We have all kinds of people at my house all the time.
We had, when the Russian delegation came. Oh, did
y'all have one of the students over there? No, we
had the whole group at our house, yeah. Really? I
didn't know that. When they came here to the
university and stuff? Came to the university,
came to our house. We fed them, you know, food. I
want my kids to know everybody. And when it all
boils down, you know, like my mom and dad told me,
you know, They bleed red blood, you know. It's
insane. It's just what you yourself choose to be. I
sure did.
One of my daughters is still in Montessori school.
Well, both of them are in Montessori school. But
they're friends.
You know, they have Orleans, they have Indians,
they have everything there. And I want them to know
that even though that school is, how do you say it,
sort of like an island, it really is the way that
society should be for everybody that accepts. I
mean, I want them to know what the reality is, but I
also want them to have a feeling of what it should
be.
I want them to know about the blacks who made
contributions, but I don't want them to become
immersed in blackness.
Because if you get immersed in blackness, you
forget about all the other people. Your tunnel
vision. Yeah. I don't want them to do that. I want
them to know. Like I said, I know it's impossible
under today's circumstances to give them the type
of education that I got. What do you mean, your
experience education? Yeah, the experience,
yeah. But, you know, like,
I want them to know people. My daughter knows Ann
Richards. Ann Richards gave her a letter. Took
pictures with Ann Richards.
She also took pictures with Benjamin Hook. Oh,
really? I went and heard him speak last, when he
came in. Was that when she went and saw him? Yeah. We
had a reception for him out of Diagon Alley in
Ramada. Oh. And, you know, I want her to know
everybody, that a man is a man is a man is a man. You
know, just accept him as that. And then you don't
get all bogged up on these side issues. You can go
straight ahead. Well, thank you for your time,
sir. I really appreciate it.